I'm Mark Turner.
I'm the Carbon Technology Manager in
Worldwide Developer Relations.
CoreFoundation, as the name implies,
provides a fundamental set
of system services that are
widely used throughout Mac OS X.
And they're available for
your use as well through both
Carbon and Cocoa and any other
application running on Mac OS X.
And a subset of these services are
also available to Carbon apps on
Mac OS 8 and 9 through CarbonLib.
So, this morning we're going to get
a great overview of some of the
services that you might like to
take advantage of in CoreFoundation.
And to begin with, I'd like to introduce
Chris Kane from the CoreFoundation
team to start off our overview.
Welcome, Chris.
Welcome.
This session will be an overview
of the CoreFoundation framework.
It's going to explain what it is,
describe some of the
functionality it contains,
and review some of the general
concepts of usage of CoreFoundation.
I'll begin with an overview.
CoreFoundation is a low-level
framework within Mac OS X.
It's used to implement Mac OS X and
contains functionality that you can also
use in your frameworks and applications,
as Mark said.
Both of the higher-level frameworks,
Cocoa and Carbon,
use CoreFoundation quite a bit.
Part of CoreFoundation, as Mark said,
is also available on
Mac OS 9 and 8 via CarbonLib.
This was done to ease porting of
carbonized apps to Mac OS X and
to bring some of the features of
CoreFoundation to the libraries
and applications on 8 and 9.
For similar reasons,
part of CoreFoundation is
also available from Darwin,
or within Darwin.
The CoreFoundation APIs are
C APIs on Mac OS X.
Through CarbonLib,
they are also available in the
languages supported by CarbonLib.
There are also C++ wrappers
for CoreFoundation in Apple's
C++ frameworks for Mac OS X.
Finally,
I'll briefly note that CoreFoundation
is often simply just called CF,
and I'll probably slip up during my
talk and use that abbreviation myself,
so it's good for you to
know right off the bat.
Now, why did I call CoreFoundation
a low-level framework?
Well, partly that is due to where it
sits in the overall organizational
structure of Mac OS X.
Here we see the usual simplified
diagram of the structure of the
system frameworks on Mac OS X.
CoreFoundation slips in as part of
the core services umbrella framework.
But I also called CoreFoundation a
low-level framework because it deals with
some of the most basic building blocks
of your applications and your frameworks.
These are the data structures
that you use to store
information in your application.
CoreFoundation provides several basic
opaque data structures that you can use
rather than having to write your own.
And CoreFoundation also provides several
higher-level application services,
which are built upon
the basic data types.
And again,
Apple system applications and system
frameworks within Mac OS X use
these facilities quite extensively.
One of the key aspects of CoreFoundation
is that it does not provide any
graphics or media-related features.
In the architecture of Mac OS X,
graphics and fonts and sounds
and those sorts of things are
introduced in higher-level frameworks,
frameworks at a higher level
than CoreFoundation within
that architectural diagram.
So let's begin by looking at
some of those basic data types.
We start with CFString.
A data type representing
strings of characters.
Strings tend to be one of the most
common data structures in an application,
and in Mac OS X,
CFStrings are certainly the most
common CoreFoundation data type in use.
Conceptually, a CFString is an array
of Unicode characters.
However, because the implementation
is hidden behind the opaque
CFString type and its functions,
a CFString can be smart about how
it stores those characters and
use 8-bit encodings if possible or
do other tricks for performance.
This takes strings beyond
the traditional domain of,
say, an array of 255 characters,
as in Pascal,
in some encoding that is currently in
use in the system or in the application.
By packaging up the characters,
the length,
and a fixed encoding in one type,
use of strings in an
application is simplified.
And this makes things like
internationalization easier.
Plus, by making the structure and nature
of a string more predictable,
passing and sharing strings among
different parts of an application
and frameworks is made much simpler.
CFString has become the way to pass
string data between library APIs,
framework APIs,
and applications in Mac OS X,
and is a primary way in which
strings are just simply stored
within an application as well.
And as new APIs are introduced,
they are going to use CFStrings as their
parameters and return values as well.
Now,
CFString is an abstract data structure,
so in addition to the opaque data type,
there are, of course,
a bunch of functions,
a bunch of operations on CFStrings.
First of all,
there are many ways to create a CFString.
You can create them from a Pascal string,
from a C string.
You can create them from an
array of bytes and an encoding.
You can also create them from other data,
if you will, like ints and what have you,
using formatting functionality similar
to the C language's printf function.
There are also several ways to
extract the characters of a string
and do encoding conversions,
for example, on byte data,
converting them to and from strings.
This is very handy when you're
getting information off the internet,
for example, and need to convert that
WinLatin1 HTML page into something
you can more directly use.
There are also many other
common and useful operations.
I give two examples here of
appending and concatenation
and finding type operations.
In addition to CFString,
CoreFoundation provides a number of
other basic data type abstractions,
and here are some of them,
not all of them.
These are sometimes just simple
wrapper objects for simple data types.
For example, CFBoolean represents
either true or false,
and that's very straightforward.
But most of the time,
these data structures also
provide other useful operations.
As an example,
there are a few types to represent dates
and times provided by CoreFoundation,
and there are also some operations
to work with the Gregorian
calendar representation of dates,
you know, years, months, days, hours,
etc.
These functions can do things like
figure out what day of the week it is,
or what day of the week
it's the day of the week.
what the date will be, say,
90 days from now.
And those are just representative
examples of some of the functionality.
Now, some of these types may seem to be
really too simple to be useful API,
but they sometimes come in handy
when dealing with collections.
And as we'll see in a bit,
many of these are central
pieces of the property list
mechanism in CoreFoundation.
But for now, I'm going to talk about the
collection data structures in CF,
CoreFoundation.
A collection is something that
groups together other objects,
and it generally does not matter what
the type of those other objects is.
In the case of the
CoreFoundation collections,
it is most convenient to store
other CoreFoundation objects.
However,
the operations of the collections
with respect to the type of
data that they can hold can be
configured with callback functions
to hold any pointer-sized values.
For example, you can configure a
collection to hold integers.
The callback functions determine
what happens when custom
values are added and removed,
and how they are compared when
comparison-type operations
are applied to a collection.
The usefulness of these collections is
that they can manage the memory for you,
and I'm going to begin by talking
about two of the collections,
CFArray and CFDictionary.
First we have the CFArray.
Like an array in the C language,
the values are kept in order and
are retrieved out of a CFArray using
a zero-based integer index.
The diagram on the right is showing
this mapping from indices to values.
Unlike a CFArray, though,
the values are kept compact in
that if you remove an element
from the middle of an array,
the values with higher indices are
shifted down one in order to keep the,
what you might call the index space,
the indices that you would
use to access elements,
keep those contiguous.
In addition to using a
CFArray like an array,
it is quite common to use
them as stacks and queues.
The other collection I'm going
to review today is CFDictionary.
With a CFArray, the pointer-sized values
were indexed by integer.
In a CFDictionary,
the values are indexed by keys,
and you can see this in the diagram,
which are themselves often
other CoreFoundation objects,
but can be any pointer-sized values.
In the diagram,
the strings are being used as the keys.
If I asked for the
value with the name key,
for example, at the top there,
the dictionary would return me value 1.
A CFDictionary is somewhat
like a struct in C,
although you don't want to go
and change all your structures in
your C code to use CFDictionary's.
There's a time and a place for
CFDictionary's and for structs.
Also, unlike a CFArray,
the values in the dictionary are
not kept in any particular order,
and this is because CFDictionary is
based on hashing for fast access
performance to the elements.
And again, to reiterate,
one of the principal values of these
collections is that they take care of the
memory storage and algorithms for you.
CFDictionary and CFArray are both
heavily used in the frameworks
and applications of Mac OS X.
And though it might surprise you,
CFDictionary actually tends to
be more popular than CFArray.
Dictionary just turns out to be a
very convenient way to structure
data inside of an application.
One of the ways in which
CoreFoundation uses these basic
data types and collections
together is in property lists.
A property list is a group
of CF objects of these types:
CFString, CFData, CFNumber, CFBoolean,
CFDate, CFArray, and CFDictionary,
and only objects of those seven types.
An additional restriction is
that keys of a dictionary in a
property list must be CFStrings,
that any dictionary
within a property list.
So any object or group of
objects which satisfies these
constraints is a property list.
For example,
a single CFString is a property list.
A single CFNumber is a property list.
But more often,
a property list is a collection
or collection of collections.
For example, you might have an array
with dictionaries in it,
and the dictionaries may have
dictionaries inside them,
and they have keys and values,
which are numbers and booleans and so on.
The special thing about property lists,
this group of objects,
special type of group,
is that there is a persistent,
sometimes called
flattened representation,
which is an XML-based representation.
So if you have a property list in memory,
you can easily flatten it
and write it to a file,
for example,
or send it to another application.
Later, you can, for example,
if you've written it to a file,
read the file back in and
reproduce the original object
graph by using CoreFoundation
to decode the XML representation
back into the original objects.
A file which contains a flattened
property list is itself often
referred to as a property list,
and so the term is used for both on-disk
representations of property lists,
and the in-memory representation
of the actual objects in use.
Property lists are used extensively
in Mac OS X as configuration
files and for storage of
preferences and similar things.
For example,
applications in Mac OS X are bundles,
which are represented by CFBundle,
and inside of a bundle
is a property list,
which is the configuration
information for that CFBundle,
for that application.
We'll be discussing
CFBundle later in this talk.
I'm not going to go
into it more right now.
Property lists are also often
simply a useful way of modeling
information in an application.
For example, a property list could
describe a print job,
and a print server might keep
a CFArray as a queue of print
jobs that need to be serviced.
Here we have just a few of the property
lists of a fictitious print job.
This is not taken from any
actual use on Mac OS X.
Note that all of the keys in
the dictionary are strings.
The keys are on the left,
but the values over on the right
are a mixture of strings and
dates and booleans and numbers.
The dictionary could also contain values
which are arrays or other dictionaries,
but for space reasons,
we haven't shown that in this diagram.
OK.
Let me get that.
Now that you've seen some examples
of what CoreFoundation contains,
let's talk about some of
the overriding philosophies,
concepts,
and conventions used in CoreFoundation.
These are the keys to understanding
CoreFoundation really,
because once you understand these,
you understand the basic operation
of all CoreFoundation APIs.
Often higher-level APIs,
which are based upon CoreFoundation,
have also adopted these conventions.
Picking up a new bit of
CoreFoundation APIs or those
higher-level APIs which use the same
conventions is thus much simpler,
and you only have to really concentrate
on what those specific APIs do,
what their specific behaviors are,
and not
You have to worry about figuring out what
the memory management conventions are,
for example, for those APIs.
In particular,
it is important to understand the
memory management strategy and
conventions of CoreFoundation,
because without that understanding,
you really cannot make
proper use of CoreFoundation.
The general philosophy behind
CoreFoundation was to create a
high-performance general utility
API that could be used as a substrate,
that is an underlying layer,
beneath both Carbon and Cocoa.
We took many concepts that
were already in Cocoa and
recast them down into a C API,
which could have wider utility.
More people could make use of it.
And at the same time,
we extended them with
some additional features.
The most important aspect to the
design was that the CoreFoundation
API should be consistent.
An API with a high degree of consistency
feels like a more unified and cohesive
API than one without consistency,
and it is much simpler
to use a cohesive API,
much more natural,
and much more efficient.
The coreFoundation API is a
very simple and easy-to-use API.
We also decided to design the
API around object-oriented models.
This gave us a way to logically structure
the API and a means to more easily
separate interface from implementation.
For example, nearly all data types in
CoreFoundation are opaque,
and you don't know how
they are implemented.
This also allows Apple to make
improvements in the implementation
over time without being constrained
by open data structures.
However,
it also means that all CoreFoundation
objects are essentially going
to be allocated off the heap.
In part to achieve the goal
of high performance API,
we decided to limit the
types of validation and
checking that the API does,
limit those to runtime errors.
Thus, there's very little checking
of programming errors like
passing in wrong parameters.
In the production version of the library,
Which is the one normally that
users are running against.
We don't have a lot of these,
any programming error type checks.
We put these instead in the
debug version of the library,
which uses assertions and other
checks to look for these sorts of
programming errors like passing in a
bad type of object or what have you.
One of the ways to run against the
debug version of the library is
explained in the CoreFoundation
release notes on the system.
To ensure consistency,
we adopted several naming
and argument conventions.
A few of them are listed here,
not all of them, certainly.
The abstract data types and most
higher-level functionality is
grouped into classes or modules,
like in many object-oriented
or modular languages.
We've seen several examples already,
like CFString and CFNumber.
The type of an instance of
such a class is named with the
class name plus the term ref,
and that is an opaque reference
to an object of that class.
The operations on that
type are functions,
then, that begin with the class name,
just as the type does,
and then name the operation.
So, in this example on the slide,
we have CFString,
which is the name of the class,
appendFormat,
which is the name of the operation.
Another example would
be CFArray.getCount,
which would return the
number of elements,
the number of values in the CFArray at
the time you called that function.
Also, in this object-oriented way,
the first argument to these
operations is always the object
which is to be operated upon.
So, for example,
in CFStringAppend format,
you know that the first argument
is going to be a CFString.
The exception, of course,
is functions which create new objects.
We call these create functions.
Obviously, in that case,
there's no object for
them to operate upon.
They're creating a new object.
Two other object-oriented
concepts we adopted in
CoreFoundation to limited extents,
because of course we're
operating in the C language,
which is not naturally object-oriented,
are polymorphism and introspection.
A polymorphic function is
one which can operate on many
different types of values.
In CoreFoundation we have eight
functions which can accept
references to any type of CF object.
as their parameters.
And of course, in some cases,
they also return CF types,
which are CF objects.
These are used to provide
general functionality across all
of the core foundation types.
Let's see.
As an example,
to find out what type an object is,
you would use the function cfgettypeid,
the introspection function
there in the middle,
cfgettypeid,
and pass it as an argument a cfobject,
or what you believe to be a cfobject.
You would compare its return value.
It returns a type code.
You would compare that return value
with the type codes published by
every core foundation type in its API.
So, as I said earlier,
one of the most important things
to understand about CoreFoundation
is its memory management strategy.
Reference counting is used on
all CoreFoundation objects.
For those of you who don't
know what that means,
In short, reference counting means that
each object keeps track of the
number of owners that it has.
That's one way to think about it,
at least.
When the number of owners
of an object is zero,
the object can be destroyed.
An object may have many different
logical owners in different
parts of an application,
and generally they don't
know about one another,
so reference counting is a way to
make sure that an object does not get
destroyed while it is still in use,
before it is no longer useful.
So, CFRetain, which is one of the
polymorphic functions,
is used to what we call take a reference,
or increment the reference
count of a CF object.
This is sometimes called having
a retain on the object as well,
because CFRetain is used to
increment the reference count.
The function CFRelease is used to give
up your part ownership in an object.
CoreFoundation's objects automatically
destroy themselves when their
reference count drops to zero.
You don't need to do that.
But you do need to get rid of
any references that you do have,
and I'll be talking about that.
If you have a variable which
is referencing a CoreFoundation
object but no retain on the object,
it could be destroyed out
from under you at any time,
and there is really no way to
find out that this has happened.
That's called a dangling reference,
and dangling references,
just as in Mac OS 9 or any other system,
can cause app misbehavior or a crash.
[Transcript missing]
CFRetain is used to
explicitly take reference,
but sometimes a retain is automatically
given to you when you get an object,
say, as a return value.
These automatic retains,
in addition to the ones you
explicitly do with CFRetain,
must be released later when
you no longer need the object.
If you don't do that,
the memory is not going to be freed,
and you're going to have a leak,
which will cause your app to use
more memory than it needs to.
So you have to know when
you need to explicitly make
yourself an owner of an object,
and know when you have been
given an ownership in an object.
And this is a fundamental question
that arises for a developer.
How do I own this particular object?
To answer that question,
we develop conventions
for CoreFoundation.
As our example,
we're going to look at the naming
convention for functions which
return CoreFoundation objects,
as that is by far the most
significant convention.
By convention in CoreFoundation,
if a function returns an object
of a CoreFoundation type,
it uses the verb "get" if it
is returning the object to you,
but not giving a retain on
that object to you as well.
That is,
it is not automatically returning a
part ownership in that object to you.
For example, CFDictionary get value
would return the value
out of a CFDictionary,
but would not give you a retain,
increment the reference count
automatically on that object.
And you should not release values
which are returned from get functions,
or you will create a dangling reference.
Functions which automatically do
retain a returned object for you
use either the verbs copy or create,
depending on what the function's doing.
Functions which create
new instances use create,
for example.
The objects you receive by calling
a create or copy function must
have that retain released by you
when you are done with that object,
or you're going to have a leak.
This is so important it
really deserves repeating.
Get functions never automatically
increment the reference count.
Create functions and copy functions
always increment the reference count
of objects that they are returning.
So these conventions are for
the programmer's benefit.
They're easy to remember,
and they're ways for you to know
automatically when you see an API what
is happening with respect to the memory
management of that returned object.
The use of copy and create as verbs
should not be taken to mean that objects
are always being copied or created.
A copy or a new object would not be
created when it's not appropriate.
For example,
sometimes it's done for efficiency.
Another example would be a type which
kept a cache of all the objects,
for example,
that it had created because it
was uniquing them in some way.
Create function might return
an object out of the cache
rather than making a new one.
But the reference count on that
returned object is always incremented,
whether it's a cached
object or a new one.
Well, and by the way, such a cache would
probably be implemented,
often be implemented,
by using a CFDictionary,
as I discussed earlier.
Okay,
there's one final general facility that
I'm going to discuss before we move on
to talking about some of the higher-level
application services in CoreFoundation.
That's what we call toll-free bridging.
This is mostly a benefit for
Cocoa applications and frameworks,
but it also helps a lot in a mixed
Cocoa and Carbon environment.
Some of the basic data types in
CoreFoundation are bridged to
their Cocoa counterparts such that
the CoreFoundation type and the
Cocoa type are interchangeable.
As the example at the bottom shows,
a simple cast is all that's needed
to convert the Cocoa NSString to
a CoreFoundation CFStringRef,
and vice versa, to convert a CFString to
a Cocoa NSString.
This allows these CoreFoundation and
Cocoa objects to be easily shared
and passed around the different
layers in the MACWIS10 architecture.
The list of CoreFoundation bridge
types is in the Foundation release
notes on the system.
I haven't listed them here.
Okay,
now I'd like to introduce Doug Davidson,
who will take us through some
of the application services
available from CoreFoundation.
Doug?
Thanks, Chris.
So, first I'm going to talk briefly
about some basic application
services available on both Mac OS 9
and Mac OS X that probably most
applications are going to want to use.
And then I'm going to go into
a little more depth on some
advanced application services that
CoreFoundation provides on Mac OS X.
So let's start with the
basic application services,
CFBundle, CFPlugin, CFPreferences.
[Transcript missing]
CFBundle is the heart of
our localization strategy.
This is what allows us to
ship Mac OS X simultaneously
in many different languages.
Because what CFBundle will do
is automatically provide you
with the correctly localized
version of any particular resource
based on the user's preferences.
CFBundle also has some basic
code loading facilities.
That is, it can load code and allow you
to look up symbols within it.
And in particular,
it can do this transparently
whether the code you're loading and
whether the code that is doing the
loading is Maco or CFM on Mac OS X.
Some of you have probably
already used this facility,
for example,
to allow CFM executables on Mac OS X to
use functionalities from Maco frameworks.
Now,
the functionality that CFBundle provides
is enough for basic loading of plug-ins.
That is, you can load it and you can
look up entry points within it.
But what it doesn't do is
manage the interface between the
host and the plug-in for you.
For that, we have a specialized kind
of CFBundle called CFPlugin.
Now, it's possible you may already
have an interface between
host and plug-in that you use,
and in that case,
you might not be interested in CFPlugin.
But if you're looking for such a thing,
you might want to consider CFPlugin.
I'm not going to explain
in detail how it works now.
It works,
the host looks up interfaces by UUIDs,
where the interfaces are C++ or
COM style tables of function pointers,
and those get passed back.
The best place to learn about this is
through some examples that we have,
both in the CoreFoundation documentation
on Mac OS X and in the CarbonLib SDK.
You'll also find that there are a few
places on the system where... We use
CFPlugin as our interface for plug-ins,
for example,
for plug-ins for the printing
subsystem on Mac OS X.
And finally, CFPreferences.
This is our general facility for small,
flexible application preference storage.
And these preferences are usually
both per user and per application,
although there are other possibilities.
And the way this works is
that any particular preference
is referred to by a name,
which is just a CFString key.
And the value of the preference
can be any property list type,
so it's very flexible.
All you do to store a preference is just
set that preference for the name key,
the name, and you just look it up
by name when you want it.
And CFPreferences takes
care of everything else,
handles all the storage for you.
Currently,
they're stored using the flattened
XML representation for property lists.
There are a couple of caveats.
This is not intended for huge
caches or large chunks of binary
data or anything like that.
Also, you need to be sure that anything
your application absolutely
relies on is not stored here.
These are stored external
to the application,
and it's possible that users
could erase their preferences.
You should be prepared for the
possibility that preferences are
missing or corrupted for some reason.
But it is a very valuable
general facility.
We use it all over the place.
Many of our system preferences
are stored in this way.
For example,
the user's language preferences
that I mentioned in the case of
CFBundle are stored using CFPreferences.
Okay,
next I want to go on to some advanced
application services in Mac OS X,
starting with CFRunLoop,
which is the basis for the rest of these,
and then I'll discuss some things
that are enabled by CFRunLoop.
So the RunLoop.
What is a RunLoop?
Carbon event-based applications
and Cocoa applications
have something in common.
That is,
they're both fundamentally event-driven.
The way they work is, events come in,
they're passed to the
application to be handled,
then controls return and you wait
for something else to happen again.
The fundamental mechanism that underlies
this in both cases is the RunLoop.
- Now, we call it a run loop because we
say that it runs and that it loops,
but mainly what it does is it waits.
It waits for something
interesting to happen,
tells you about it, you handle it,
and it goes back and waits again.
And the thing it waits for can be
any of a wide variety of things.
It might be the arrival
of a Mach message,
it might be perhaps the
arrival of a network packet,
it might be just the arrival
of some specific time.
But the important thing about
the RunLoop is that it can
wait for all of these things,
a wide variety of things simultaneously,
efficiently, easily, without pulling,
without using processor resources.
This turns out to be a
very powerful concept.
Now, each thread has exactly
one RunLoop object.
There may be many interfaces to it,
so CoreFoundation, through Carbon,
through Cocoa, they're all dealing with
the same underlying object.
You can use any or all of them.
Typically,
you would want to use the highest level
interface that suits your purposes.
Often you'll be using it
through Carbon or Cocoa,
but if you happen to be using
a CoreFoundation level source,
something at the CoreFoundation
level that the RunLoop can wait for,
then you would want to use the
CoreFoundation interface to it,
which is CFRunLoop.
Now, one thing about RunLoops is that you
may not want to wait for any possible
type of event source at any given time.
For example,
you might not want a certain timer
to fire while you are tracking
mouse moves or something like that.
So RunLoops have something called modes,
and at any given time,
the RunLoop is running
in a specific mode,
and any particular source is
registered with the RunLoop for
only a certain set of modes.
So, for example, in Cocoa,
there are a couple of specific
defined modes that Cocoa uses.
One, the modal panel RunLoop mode
is used when the modal panel
is up and is waiting on that.
There's another one that's used typically
when the mouse is being tracked.
But normally, the RunLoop would be used
and run in the default mode.
And when you register a
source with the RunLoop,
you can register it with a
specific mode or set of modes,
or you can choose to register
with the so-called common modes,
which is a set of modes determined
by your application environment.
In Cocoa,
it would be the default mode plus the
modal panel and event tracking modes.
Now, the RunLoop by itself is
not terribly interesting.
What's interesting are the
things that it enables,
the things you can do with it.
So, at the CoreFoundation level,
some of the things that can wait for are,
well, first of all,
you can use it to wait for raw
Mach messages or raw network packets.
And if you want to do that,
we have a CFMockPort for waiting
for raw Mach messages or CFSocket
for waiting for events on a socket.
That's useful, for example,
if you're in a Carbon or
Cocoa application and you
want to wait for these things.
You don't have to spawn a
separate thread to do that.
You can simply be notified.
You can get a function callback
within your main event loop.
And I'm going to go into some other
CFRunLoop sources in just a moment.
You can create your own.
It is a little tricky to do so.
So another thing I said you
could wait for is just the
arrival of a specific time.
And you can wait for a single
time or a repeating sequence of
times with a CFRunLoop timer.
What you do is you create the timer,
tell it what time or times to wait for,
and you tell it what function will be
called back when that time arrives.
And then you attach it to a run loop
in a given mode or set of modes.
And when the run loop is
waiting in one of those modes,
it checks to see if
your time has arrived.
And if your time has arrived,
then you get a callback.
Now, if you're waiting for a single time,
then the timer is automatically
invalidated after that time has
arrived and the timer is fired.
If you're waiting for a
repeating sequence of times,
then you would have to invalidate the
timer yourself when you're done with it.
Now, I talked about raw Mach messages.
They have a lot of advantages.
They're the fundamental low-level
local IPC mechanism in Mac OS X,
and they're very powerful
and high performance,
and they have a lot of flexibility,
but they can be difficult
and tricky to use.
So we also have a slightly,
just one higher level,
one level up mechanism built on
top of them in CoreFoundation
called CFMessagePort,
which is a high performance,
low overhead local IPC mechanism.
And you can use it either asynchronously,
sending messages one way,
or synchronously,
sending a message and getting a reply.
The way you use CFMessagePort is that you
create a local message port on one end,
and
And these built ports can be
advertised to other processes
on the system with a name,
which again is just a CFString.
And you create a remote
message port looked up by name
to represent the other end,
the end to which you're sending.
The message that you
send is just a CFData,
that is a collection of bytes,
plus optionally a message ID, an integer.
And the reply,
if you want to get a reply back,
is a CFData.
So what the intended receiver of
the message will do is to publish as
API the protocol for this message.
That is, how to interpret the data,
or the message ID of both,
and whether there will be a reply
and how that should be interpreted.
The sender would create a remote
message port to represent the port,
the destination of the message,
and call CFMessagePort send request
with the message to be sent.
Then the receiver will be notified
within its RunLoop getting a callback,
and if there's a reply,
the receiver would return the reply,
and then the sender would get the reply,
and the message port send would return.
Now, there's also another mechanism
that we have built on top of these,
which is perhaps lesser known,
but very useful.
And this is a broadcast
local IPC mechanism,
CFNotificationCenter.
And what this allows you to do is to post
happenings of any sort to an arbitrary,
possibly unknown, set of receivers.
These notifications are
identified by their name and
optionally also by another string.
The name, again, is just a CFString.
Optionally also by another string
representing the object that sends them.
And they can carry with them
essentially arbitrary data,
again, a property list.
In this case,
the sender would specify what sort of
notifications it's going to send out,
what their names would be,
and what sort of information
they would carry with them.
And when the sender wants to
send one of these notifications,
it simply posts it and goes on its way.
It may choose whether the
notifications are going to be
delivered immediately or not.
The receivers,
if anyone on the system who wants
to receive such a notification
simply registers to receive it.
The sender doesn't have to
know anything about them.
You register based on the name,
optionally also the string
representing the sender.
And you can choose whether you want to
receive these notifications immediately
or whether you want them to be delayed.
Because typically,
it's not necessary for all the receivers
to get the notification at once,
and it's rather expensive
to wake them all up,
wake up all these processes at
once to deliver the notification.
Often, it's enough if you will simply
get this notification the
next time you become active.
And if you, a notification might
be sent multiple times,
you can choose to have
those coalesced if you like.
So this is a very useful mechanism.
It's not intended for large amounts of
data or very high volume or frequency.
But it's useful in a
variety of circumstances,
especially, for example,
in combination with other
channels of information.
For example, if you had a suite of
applications on the system that
all shared a set of preferences,
and one application was going
to change those preferences,
it could send out a notification to let
all the other applications in the suite
know that the preferences have changed,
and then at their convenience,
they could look up the changed value.
Or if you had some area on the file
system that you were working with,
and you changed it,
you could send out a notification
to let any interested party
know that it had changed,
and that they should go and look
it up and see what had happened.
So now,
let's discuss where you can go for
more information about CoreFoundation.
There is documentation on
your system and online.
There are a number of examples,
both with your Mac OS X Developer CD and
in the CarbonLib SDKs.
And you should not forget to
look at the release notes,
which describe anything new or anything
that has changed in CoreFoundation.
And there are some specialized
release notes that are more like
discussions of topics in depth,
one on CFBundle and CFPlugin with
some detailed examples of CFPlugin,
one describing the info
dictionary in a bundle in detail,
and one on localization.
And now I'd like to bring
Mark Turner back to wrap
things up and start our Q&A.
Let's take a quick look at, well,
I was going to say what the roadmap is,
but let's talk about this.
So yeah, as I said,
I'm the Carbon Technology Manager.
Although CoreFoundation is obviously
not a carbon-specific technology,
I'll be happy to take your questions
or comments about CoreFoundation.
You can email me at mark@apple.com.
There is the email address here,
which is read by the engineering team,
so that's another great
place to send your feedback.
And these two mailing lists I encourage
you to get on if you're not already.
It's a great place to get your
questions answered and share
your knowledge about Carbon,
Cocoa, and CoreFoundation.
These lists are available if
you haven't been there before.
There's a webpage at lists.apple.com
where you can sign up for a
great many Apple mailing lists.
And now, so here we are,
10 o'clock Friday morning.
Most of these sessions
have gone by already,
but I'd like to highlight them for
you so that you can look at them on
ADC TV or on the DVDs when you get them.
First being the Cocoa Overview.
That's a great session just
for those of you who haven't
gotten started yet with Cocoa.
The Carbon Event Manager is another
overview session for Carbon developers.
We really encourage you to look
into the Carbon Event Manager.
It simplifies your code and gets you
much better performance on Mac OS X.
And then the advanced
Cocoa Topics session,
which we had yesterday,
for more information about the RunLoop
and other things that Doug mentioned.
And if you're here this afternoon,
the Cocoa Feedback Forum would
be a great place to bring your
questions about Cocoa and,
of course, CoreFoundation because many of
the same people will be there.